Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on logical reasoning.
Ever felt like your
brain needed a power up?
This is it.
Concept explanation.
All right, my friend.
Let's talk about logical reasoning.
This is a crucial section, especially
for competitive exams, and it's
all about checking your ability
to analyze, evaluate, and solve
problems using structured thinking.
Basically, it's like a
mental gym, you know?
It involves understanding the
hidden relationships between facts,
identifying those sneaky patterns,
and then very cleverly drawing valid
conclusions based on whatever statements
or scenarios are thrown your way.
The best part, you don't need any
prior subject knowledge for this it.
Purely relies on your common sense,
your analytical skills, and your
fantastic ability to think clearly and
systematically to deduce logical outcomes.
It's all about applying your
brain, not your textbooks.
Real world relevance.
Now, why is logical reasoning
so important for say an officer?
Well, my friend, these skills
are absolutely vital for making
effective decisions in those
super complex banking scenarios.
And of course, for quick problem solving
when a customer throws a curve ball away.
An officer, or frankly, anyone in a
professional role uses these skills to
analyze financial data spot discrepancies
like a Sherlock Holmes of numbers.
You see, and strategize
efficient workflows.
All this ensures smooth operations
and most importantly, sound judgment.
It's not just exam theory, it's
real life application boss.
Breakdown of question types based on
our deep analysis of past exam patterns.
Recurring question formats in logical
reasoning include some big hitters.
First up, the heavyweight champion
puzzles and seating arrangement, making
up approximately 25 to 30% of the paper.
This is typically the largest
section involving quite complex
scenarios where you arrange people
or items based on given conditions.
Then we have syllogism around 10
to 15%, which tests your deductive
reasoning from statements to
determine a valid conclusion.
Next, inequalities about eight to
12% where you deal with relationships
between elements using symbols like
greater than, less than or equals.
After that blood relations,
a cozy five to 8%.
That asks you to figure out familial
connections Coding, decoding another five
to 7% is all about deciphering patterns in
coded messages or words, direction sense.
A smaller but tricky, three to
5% checks your understanding
of directions and distances.
Data sufficiency, about five to 10% asks
you to decide if the given information
is enough to answer a question, and
finally input output roughly five to
7%, which involves a machine, not a
real one mind you, but a hypothetical
one that processes an input following
a specific rule to produce an output.
Quite a lineup, isn't it?
Formulas plus tricks now for the
formulas part, but honestly, logical
reasoning is more about clever
rules and strategic approaches
rather than mathematical equations.
You know, for syllogism,
remember these visual aids.
All A or B means A is a
subset of B. No, A is.
B means A and B have no overlap at all.
Some A or B means A and B
have at least some common part
not empty and some A are not.
B means there's some part of A
that's outside B, for either our
cases, which we call complimentary
pairs like some A RB plus no A is
B. Or all a RB plus some A are not.
B, the conditions are crucial.
Both conclusions must be individually
false and the subject and
predicate must be exactly the same.
Very important.
Don't miss this.
I. For inequalities, think of a
common path to compare two elements.
Make sure there's a continuous
path between them without
any conflicting symbols.
Priority wise, if symbols like greater
than, greater than or equal to and
equals are in the path, the greater
than symbol takes the highest priority.
Then greater than or
equal to and then equals.
If you see opposite signs,
like greater than and less than
appearing in the path between two
elements, then sorry my friend.
No definite conclusion can be drawn.
It's like a traffic jam of
symbols in blood relations.
Always, always use a systematic diagram.
Symbols for gender, like a plus for male
minus for female, and generations are key.
Vertical lines for parent, child,
horizontal for siblings, and a
double horizontal for a spouse makes
life so much easier for coding.
Decoding.
Put on your detective hat.
Look for alphabetical position shifts,
maybe reverse alphabetical order, or
even funky pattern changes like special
coding for vowels versus consonants.
And for those big puzzles and seating
arrangement questions, always, always
start with definite information.
Use tables or diagrams like circular or
linear setups to organize everything.
And a pro tip, no down
negative information.
Like who is not sitting
next to whom separately.
This helps avoid confusion later.
Methods of solving logical reasoning
problems, my friend, absolutely demand
systematic approaches for syllogism.
Start by drawing when diagrams for
each statement represent universal
affirmative, universal negative,
particular affirmative, and particular
negative statements with precision.
Then combine these diagrams to
represent all statements together.
Now analyze each conclusion
based on your combined diagram.
If a conclusion is definitely true
from your diagram, mark it true.
If it's definitely false, mark it
false, and if it's possibly true, but
not certainly true, meaning it could
be true in some scenarios, but not all.
Then for definite conclusion
questions, it's considered false.
Finally, don't forget to check for
either our cases if no definite
conclusion directly follows.
For puzzles and seating arrangement,
first read the entire problem very,
very carefully to grasp the context
and all the elements involved.
Then draw a basic structure, a
circle for circular arrangements,
parallel lines for linear or a grid.
For those more complex puzzles,
identify and directly place any definite
information onto your structure or table.
Convert all those conditional statements
into small, manageable notes or symbols.
Start linking related conditions.
To deduce even more information.
Use elimination systematically.
If a person absolutely cannot be in a
certain spot, just mark it out and when
definite information runs out, consider
possibilities one by one, methodically.
When tackling inequalities first pinpoint
the two elements you need to compare.
Then trace the path between these two
elements through the given statements.
Jot down all the directional signs
you encounter, like greater than,
less than, greater than, or equal
to, less than or equal to or equals.
If all the signs between the elements.
Point in the same consistent direction.
For example, only greater than
and greater than or equal to.
If you're reading left to right, then
a conclusion can be drawn based on the
priority of signs we discussed earlier.
But my friend, if conflicting signs
appear like A is greater than b and B
is less than C between A and C, then
no definite conclusion can be drawn.
Simple as that.
For blood relations, it's all about
creating a clear family tree diagram.
Using standard symbols represent
individuals and their gender clearly.
Draw lines for relationships, vertical for
parent, child, horizontal for siblings,
and a double horizontal line for a spouse.
Go step by step, adding each piece
of information to your diagram.
And finally deduce the exact
relationship by tracing the parts
in your perfectly drawn diagram.
Shortcuts and smart techniques.
All right, listen up for some clever
shortcuts and smart techniques.
First up, option elimination
for multiple choice questions.
You can often knock out incorrect
options super quickly without
fully solving the entire problem,
especially useful in syllogism or
inequalities, A real time saver.
Always, always use a
diagrammatic approach.
Venn diagrams, seating charts, family
trees, visualize the information.
This significantly reduces your
mental load, and more importantly,
the chances of making a silly
mistake for negative information.
Convers.
If a statement says, X is not sitting
next to Y, don't just read it and
forget it, rephrase it, or mark it
very clearly as a constraint rather
than trying to place someone directly.
Focus on definite clues.
First.
In puzzles, always kick off with
statements that give you concrete
positions or relationships before you even
glance at the conditional or vague ones.
Variable substitution for inequalities
if you are stuck mentally.
Substitute simple numbers for
variables to quickly check
the validity of an inequality.
In straightforward cases, it's like
a mini proof for coding, decoding.
It's all about.
Pattern recognition.
Look for common coding patterns, like
reverse order, simple alphabetical
shifts, plus one minus one, plus
two minus two, or perhaps even
vowel consonant specific coding.
And finally, time management.
This is golden allot specific
time to each question type.
If a puzzle is taking too, too
long, be smart, move on and come
back if time permits, don't get
stuck in a mental quicksand.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
Now let's talk about the pitfalls, my
friend, so you don't fall into them first.
Assuming facts, never ever use
outside knowledge only deduce
conclusions from the information
explicitly given in the statements.
Your common sense beyond the
problem, park it outside.
Second overlapping Venn diagrams
indiscriminately in syllogism.
Be super careful not to force an overlap
or separation where the statements
don't explicitly guarantee it.
It's a precise art, not a free for all.
Third, misinterpreting some.
Some means at least one, remember, not
necessarily not all, it's a common trick.
Fourth, ignoring either or cases.
Failing to identify those complementary
pairs in syllogism can lead to
absolutely incorrect conclusions.
Keep an eye out for them.
Fifth, rushing through
statements, especially in
puzzles, a single misread word.
Can lead you down a completely wrong path.
Read carefully.
Take your time initially.
Sixth incorrectly.
Applying gender in blood relations.
Do not, I repeat.
Do not assume gender based on
a name unless it's specified.
A is the child of B Does not
tell you a gender does it.
Seventh directional errors.
In direction sense.
Mixing up left right turns or cardinal
directions is a classic mistake.
Always visualize yourself
facing the given direction.
And finally, ignoring constraints.
Missing or forgetting a crucial condition
in a puzzle is a recipe for disaster.
Keep all constraints in your mind,
or better yet on your rough sheet.
W Edge Framework Summary.
Let's quickly sum it up with
our W Edge framework, shall we?
So what is logical reasoning?
It's the process of using structured
thought to analyze information
and draw valid conclusions.
Why is it important you ask?
Because it's key for assessing
analytical skills, problem solving
abilities, and decision making.
Which are crucial for various job roles.
When is it applied?
Well, it's applied Whenever you need
to solve problems, make decisions,
or understand relationships
between different data points.
Where can you apply it?
Areas include competitive exams,
your daily life problem solving
and professional decision
making in the workplace.
Who benefits from it?
Friends, professionals, and anyone
needing to make informed judgements
or solve complex problems, benefits
immensely from these skills.
And how is it applied?
It's supplied by systematically
analyzing, given information, identifying
patterns, and deducing logical outcomes
through various techniques like
diagramming or precise rule application.
Clear as day, right?
Fully worked out examples.
Let's dive into some practical
examples, my friend, so you can
see how it all comes together.
Example one syllogism question statements.
All books are pens.
Some pens are pencils.
Conclusions one.
Some books are pencils two.
No book is a pencil.
A only conclusion one follows B,
only conclusion two follows C. Either
conclusion one or two follows D neither.
Conclusion one nor two.
Follows understand the question
before moving to explanation solution.
Step one, draw when diagrams
for statements statement one.
All books are pens.
Imagine drawing a circle for books
completely inside a larger circle.
For pens, it's like a small fish
inside a big pond, you know,
statement two, some pens are pencils.
Now draw a circle for pencils that
overlaps with a portion of the pen circle.
This is important.
It can overlap with the book circle
or it might not, as per the statement.
Some pens or pencils, we aren't
forced to overlap with books.
Step two, analyze conclusions.
Conclusion one.
Some books or pencils.
From our combined Venn diagram, we
absolutely cannot definitively say
that books and pencils overlap.
They might or they might not.
The statement, some pen are pencils
simply doesn't force the pencils
to touch the books, part of pens.
Therefore, conclusion one
does not definitively follow.
Conclusion two, no book is a pencil.
Similarly, my friend, we cannot
definitively say no book is a pencil.
They might not overlap or they
might, the given statements just
don't provide enough information to
guarantee this absolute separation.
Therefore, conclusion two does
not definitively follow Step
three, check for either or.
Case now, pay close attention.
Conclusions.
One.
Some books are pencils and
two, no book is a pencil form,
a classic complimentary pair.
Both conclusions involve the
exact same two elements, books
and pencils, and crucially.
Both conclusions are individually
false, meaning they are not
definitively true from the statements.
In such a scenario if one is true, the
other simply must be false and vice versa.
This is the telltale sign of an
either or situation, correct.
Answer C, either conclusion,
one or two follows.
Example two.
Blood relations question
pointing to a photograph.
Ram said she is the daughter of
the only son of my grandfather.
How is the woman in the
photograph related to Ram?
A mother, B sister, C cousin, d
daughter understand the question
before moving to explanation solution.
Step one, break down the
statement from Ram's perspective.
Let's dissect this piece by piece.
From Ram's point of view, my
grandfather, this refers to Ram's
paternal or maternal grandfather.
Simple enough.
Only son of my grandfather.
Now this is the crucial phrase.
If Ram's grandfather is his paternal
grandfather, then the only son
would logically be Ram's father.
If Ram's grandfather is his maternal
grandfather, then the only son would be
Ram's uncle, meaning his mother's brother.
However, the phrase only
son is the key, my friend.
If Ram's grandfather has only one son and
Ram is part of that family lineage, then
that only son simply must be Ram's Father.
Think about it.
If it were Ram's uncle, then
Ram's father would also have
to be a son of the grandfather.
Which would contradict the only son part.
So it points directly to Ram's father.
Step two, identify the
only son of my grandfather.
This person, my dear friend, is
none other than Ram's father.
Got it.
Step three, relate the woman to
the only son of my grandfather.
The statement says she is the daughter
of the only son of my grandfather,
so putting our deduction in.
It means she is the
daughter of Ram's father.
See how it simplifies?
Step four, determine
the relationship to ram.
If she is the daughter of Ram's
father and Ram is also his father's
child, then it's crystal clear.
She is Ram's sister.
No rocket science here, correct.
Answer.
B. Sister.
Example three.
Inequalities question statements P,
greater than Q, greater than or equal to.
R, equal to S, less than T, less
than or equal to U. Conclusions one.
P greater than S two Q, less than
U. A. Only conclusion one Follows
B, only conclusion two follows.
C. Either conclusion, one
or two follows D. Both.
Conclusion one and two follows E.
Neither conclusion one nor two.
Follows Understand the question
before moving to explanation solution.
Step one.
Analyze conclusion one.
P. Greater than S, let's trace the path
from P to S in the given statement.
P. Greater than Q, greater
than or equal to R, equal to S.
The symbols along this path are
greater than, greater than or equal
to and equals notice all symbols
are pointing in the same direction,
indicating that P is indeed greater
than the elements that follow the
dominant symbol among greater than.
Greater than or equal to and
equals is clearly greater.
Therefore, B, greater
than S definitely follows.
This one's a winner.
Step two, analyze conclusion two.
Q, less than U. Let's look at the path
from Q to U in the given statement.
Q. Greater than or equal to R, equal to
S, less than T, less than or equal to UR.
Now pay close attention here.
Notice the presence of opposite symbols.
We have.
Q, greater than or equal to R, which
implies Q is greater than or equal
to R, and then later S, less than
T, which implies S is less than T
because there are conflicting opposite
directional symbols greater than and
less than appearing in the path between
q and u. No definite relationship
can be established between Q and you.
It's like trying to drive
in two directions at once.
Therefore, Q less than you
does not Definitely follow
Step three combined results.
So what did we find?
Conclusion one definitely follows.
Conclusion two.
Does not follow correct answer.
A only conclusion one follows.
Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.